today our nation faces a crisis in finding job opportunities for negroes. from the long view of our past, this is indeed a historical irony. negroes were brought to this country, albeit unwillingly, because of the excellent job opportunities—as  slaves in the tobacco fields of virginia, on the rice and cotton plantations of the carolinas. it has been claimed by some historians that the main theme of southern history was the creation of a social system designed to keep negroes in these jobs. slavery, terror, racism, segregation and discrimination were elements of such a system. from the countryside to the city twentieth century wartime manpower shortages in the two world wars and the korean war created a demand for negroes elsewhere in american life than in southern fields. in response to this demand, negroes moved out of the southern countryside—in , on the eve of world war i, only  per cent lived in the north and west; by ,  per cent lived in the cities of the north and west. in , three-quarters of the negroes in the united states lived in rural areas; by , threequarters were urban dwellers. during this brief, -year span, the intermittent intervals in which negroes were sought for urban industrial jobs were countered by new developments in agriculture. the original job opportunities for which negroes were brought to the united states began to disappear due to mechanization of farming in the south. tractors, chemicals and mechanical cotton pickers replaced men, hoes and mules. in georgia, for instance, the use of tractors increased five and one-half times in the single decade between  and . from the beginning of world war ii through the end of the korean war, the negro worker underwent a period of extreme economic and geographic dislocation under a push-pull sort of pressure. the push was the substitution of mechanical power for human labor in southern agriculture, the pull was the demand for unskilled labor in urban centers. since , the push has been accelerated but the pull has diminished. in , there were , negro-owned farms in the south; by , this num ber had decreased by over , to ,. in the next five years, another , negro-owned farms disappeared. in other words, the rate of displacement of negroes from agriculture increased. meanwhile. the demand for unskilled labor elsewhere in the economy diminished with the step-up in automation. negro workers bore the brunt of the hardship. unemployment of negro workers rose from . per cent in , to . in , an increase of over two and one-half times. this growing non-farm unemployment gave rise to a new phenomenon. we discovered negro men, either born in the city or longtime dwellers therein, with a history of good industrial employment, who were now welfare recipients. these men had been displaced by automation or plant move-outs. northern racism in the form of segregation and discrimination, coupled with too little and too poor an education, has frozen these men out of a secure position in the work force. we have created and continue to hold trapped a new urban peasantry. whites with social conscience have tried to bury the problem of urban negroes by saying that it was a question of “newcomers” to the city—as though negroes were sort of “black irishmen.” this is not the case. northern social and economic practices perpetuate the second-class status of negroes, be they fresh from the mississippi delta or third-generation city-dwellers. northern cities invented de facto segregation, in which negroes, regardless of education and social status are held within a residential ghetto and sent to segregated neighborhood schools. with the breakdown of legal segregation in the south, the south has adopted this northern invention. the northern cities have created a second-class status which has resulted in what i call “cultural castration” of the lower-class negro male. in chicago, one out of every six able-bodied negro males is completely without work—and a second one out of the same six receives an income so low that it keeps him and his family below the poverty level. we have created vast high-rise compounds of public housing in the heart of the ghetto in which we cluster together poverty, familial and social disorganization. these conditions cause “slum shock,” an illness which our society could eradicate if we use the same vigor that we used in eradicating polio. our schools also are failing the negro child. this year in chicago, the number of high school graduates will be slightly over a third of the number of negroes who reach the age of . an alarming number of those who do graduate will not be able to read at the high school freshman level, so that even they lack the skills necessary to make the grade in an automated society. lest you still think that the ra cial differences are only a problem of rural background of the negro poor, let me remind you that in the city of chicago the white high school drop-out earns almost % more than the negro college graduate. new job opportunities given these conditions—i join commissioner of education, francis keppel, in saying thank god for the civil_rights movement, south and north. the impact of the civil_rights movement is opening up new positions for negroes— some with firms which have never hired negroes before, and some in skilled occupations and managerial posts from which negroes were excluded. this movement has gained the attention of many employers who never before had given the condition and the status of the negro a second thought. the civil_rights movement is also important because it has given the little black man new dignity. the direct action arm of the revolution has provided an opportunity for the little guy to speak for himself—to tell of his anguish, his desperation, his desolation, to force those in the seats of power to act. let me give you an idea of some of the openings that we at the urban league see in the chicago labor market. prior to the summer of , well-trained, skilled young negroes, with few exceptions, were confined to employment by government agencies or business institutions within the ghetto. today, we find chicago loop businesses affirmatively seeking negro professional, clerical and technical help. the most dramatic breakthrough in which we participated was the agreement last summer of five major loop banks with the chicago urban league to develop an extensive program of recruiting negro employees. prior to the announcement of our program, there were only a handful of negro workers in the city’s banks. today, either directly through their personnel offices or on referral from the urban league, negroes are entering the banks’ staffs at all levels. at one of the largest banks, there is a first—a negro management-trainee. all of chicago’s major banks are looking for them. we also note that insurance companies are hiring negroes as whitecollar personnel, and we have begun the long awaited breakthrough in the advertising business. in short, we are dealing with thousands of employers who are new to the hiring of negro workers and the same is going on all over the north. like anyone else with scientific and engineering training, negroes with advanced degrees are in great demand. the possession of scare skills tends to make a negro very attractive; he performs the technical job while he helps satisfy the government contract compliance officer. there are further breakthroughs into once restricted areas. in one | automotive plant, we have seen a dramatic increase in the number of negro foremen. in other plants, some under-employed, well-educated negroes have moved into supervisory positions. some firms that had no negro employees, even in production or maintenance, are now hiring in order to comply with the state fair employment practices law and the president’s order on equal employment. in the food industry, which is sensitive to consumer pressure, negroes are being brought into the management training programs of the chain-stores, although they are still being slotted into stores in negro neighborhoods. the large manufacturing firms which supply this industry have followed suit by hiring negroes as wholesale salesmen to the food retailers. in the area of government employment, we have seen, in the last few years, a great increase in the number of negro teachers. in federal employment, while negroes are still disproportionately located at the lower levels of civil service, during the last two years there has been nearly a doubling in the number of negroes above grade . in general, we have noted that almost every major firm in chicago is asking for some talented and skilled negroes. the young, welltrained negro now has a chance to get into the mainstream of american economic life. this situation has put a great strain on my employment and guidance staff. tney are under pressure to provide the “instant negro.” the employer names the job specification for which he wants a negro and we are supposed to produce one to fill the spot with the same magic as producing a genii out of a bottle. the new opportunities and the american economy these new job opportunities for negroes have not been opened long enough to make any over-all change in the economic structure of the negro community, nor any basic changes in the labor force of major employers. lacking such evidence of basic change, we constantly have a gnawing question— do these new opportunities represent the opening of the doors of equal opportunity to all, or do they just represent token concessions to the great pressure of the civil_rights movement? i suspect that it is some of both. it is the job of the legal defense and educational fund, it is the job of the urban league, and of the entire civil_rights movement to guarantee that the doors really do swing wide open and stay open. we have had a succession of systems of race relations in our nation—first, slavery, then rural peonage, followed by urban segregation and discrimination. we have to ask ourselves—what is the next stage? will we develop a system of “tokenism” in which a symbolically small number of well educated, middle-class negroes  have access to the total society, while the mass of negroes are excluded? i fear that tokenism, as a system, may become a distinct danger, even if employers who are opening up these new opportunities are serious and are not going to close the door after they have their token negroes. equal opportunity for employment has severe limitations when a nation does not have enough employment to go around. it also has severe limits for the individual when he has not had an equal opportunity to become prepared for the job. in a certain sense, the racial revolution comes at a most convenient time. we are undergoing one of the longest economic booms in recent history; we are approaching three and one-half years of continuous prosperity. it is obvious that an employer has to be hiring to hire fairly. still, the employment effects of the current boom are minimized by the rapid introduction of automation and other technological advances. our current national rate of unemployment is still five and one-half per cent of the labor force. there is a danger that unemployment will increase; for the displacement of labor by machines will continue while the labor force grows at an accelerated rate as the: post-war baby boom hits the labormarket. a business recession] would further complicate the picture and diminish the number of: jobs. so far, the improvement of negroes’ employment position has been largely dependent upon full employment for all. war-time labor scarcity did more to improve the . employment position and skills of negroes than any other single social movement. any failure in the general economic health of the nation and a lack of expansion of employment would tend to freeze the negroes’ new opportunities for employment into tokenism or worse. racism has become frozen into the fabric of american society. in the cities these practices have created an urban peasantry which, every year, is becoming further removed from the constantly rising level of skills demanded by employers. today, in chicago, the major employers such as the steel mills, are requiring a high school diploma for employment as a laborer. yet, this year in chicago only one out of every three negroes who reach the age of  will possess this qualification. where do the twothirds without a diploma go to work if they can’t work in the mills? they are headed for a career of marginal jobs, unemployment and welfare. they and their families are locked in a pattern of poverty, ghettoes, segregated and inferior schooling—and, of course, with such conditions, unstable family life. unless our nation can break this pattern by a massive attack on second-class and segregated conditions, especially in education, the new job opportunities will be meaningless to these people and their children. depending upon the general level of employment, one-third to one-half of the urban negroes under current conditions are in a position to take advantage of new employment opportunities. this means also that under current conditions one-half to two-thirds are walled off from a secure position in the labor market. the giant step ahead the american community cannot allow “tokenism” to become institutionalized as we have the systems of race relations which preceded it. we are now in the midst of, and must continue, an all-out onslaught against the status quo which denies equal opportunity. we are on a road without turning. we must shun the blandishments of the gradualist who insists that things are getting better. his optimism reminds me of the man who met an acquaintance on the street and, in a friendly manner, inquired, “how’s your wife?” the friend retorted, “compared to what?” we must all understand that we are striving for equal opportunity and we must be clear ourselves in that equal opportunity means equal opportunity—not just a condition better than formerly existed. as far as jobs are concerned: it means equal education and training; equal access to the job; equal working conditions and equal chance for advancement all the way to chairman of the board. while we must realistically recognize that the achievement of this objective is not the work of a day, we still want it and should have had it—yesterday. the point which i am struggling ponderously to make is that those of us who are in the vanguard of the battle for equality must never allow our eye to be taken off the goal of total equality, even though some things are getting better for some black people. let me be clear. this is not intended to be a blanket indictment of all employers. it is a blanket indictment of that portion of the american system which has fostered and condoned crippling discrimination and then, in defense, pointed the finger of blame at the cripple it created. there have been, for a long time, industrial leaders in the areas of our concern. in chicago, e.g., inland steel, international harvester, spiegels, western electric, illinois bell, are among those with a very long history of employment of negroes. more recently others have joined. our leading banking institutions such as first national, continental illinois and harris trust, are offering a real shot in the arm to help our community toward fair employment by both precept and, more importantly, by example. but we have had too few employers on the right track, and we have involved none to the extent which we should.  but, even in the face of these breakthroughs, if we are to save the urban poor and their children from an entire lifetime of joblessness and hopelessness, of costly dependency and delinquency, we must establish a massive crashcrisis program of the magnitude of the marshall plan and the lavishness of the manhattan project. we must increase our determination to eliminate segregation and discrimination from american life and, then, go even further. here are some of the ingredients of such a program: ) double the expenditures of urban school systems and spend most of the extra money on those suffering from “slum shock.” ) retrain the unemployed so that they have marketable skills. the chicago urban league has had success with demonstration projects in this field, working with public agencies, private firms, and joint projects. in other words, everyone can share in this responsibility.  ) put enough money into public welfare so that we can change the emphasis from relief to rehabilitation. ) institute a massive program of public works to provide jobs and decent housing, school, transportation, cultural and recreational facilities for all, thereby making it possible for men and women to earn their living with dignity, while they are being retrained for other jobs. these programs would truly eradicate the causes of poverty and create the conditions of dignity. the costs are little in terms of human benefit—large in terms of our traditional ways of thinking. in chicago alone, i estimate that we would have to spend a minimum of a half a billion dollars a year for the next  years. ml ¦. ' + vf ^ t -* ^ last spring, at the time of the birmingham riots, eric sevareid wrote: “for america, this postwar period is surely the period of the negro passion . . . this generation is not likely to find surcease from the negro passion; its source springs and the resistance to it are too deeply grounded for easy resolution, and its present outburst too long delayed. ...” a year later after our nation has taken the first steps towards equal opportunity, we find that this passion has grown, not diminished. it will not subside until we take giant strides
why we have returned to the south
a vivid recollection of an incident in my childhood still haunts me—the gloating and gruesome description a neighbor of the lynching of a gro man, screaming in terror and agony as he was dragged into a car, driven to an isolated area, dangled by a rope from a tree and then shot to pieces by dozens of jeering white men. i myself have twice been attacked with fists and a knife for merely sitting next to negroes on buses. as a georgia minister i preached and tried to practice brotherhood and fairness for all men only to be called a “nigger lover” (a term not meant as complimentary) by some of my church members. no cowards hiding behind bedsheets and the anonymity of a crowd ever visited my churches, but they visited others nearby, sometimes as a threat and sometimes as invited guests. even in recent years on visits to the south  have seen long lines of ignorant klansmen in automobiles riding through the night and stopping at certain houses to warn of punishment to those who did not conform to the standards set by these men, who in their limited outlook are so sure that they speak both for god and for what they think should be the laws of men. and all the while the majority of decent law-abiding southerners sit by and let the irresponsible elements in society (some in official positions of responsibility) perform gross injustices and convey an image that  still do not believe is true of the average white southerner. of late, there has been a rash of articles about episodes in all parts of the country where people refuse to interfere when murder, rape and robbery are being committed. the usual southern reaction to lawlessness and injustice to negroes is a subtle part of this dangerous tendency for the future of civilization to turn away lest one’s involvement bring trouble on oneself. but we have come back to the south with the intention and the desire to live here the remainder of our lives, and not because we approve of all southern beliefs and actions. my wife, also a native georgian, and i wholeheartedly welcomed the supreme court decision of , leading to what must ultimately be the end of compulsory segregation in schools, and, we hope, in all areas of life. furthermore, we deplore the slow pace of integration and the continued injustices the negroes of the south have to bear. we do not underestimate the bitterness, the prejudice and the violence aroused anew in many southern white people. perhaps, then, there may be those who wonder why we have taken five children into an area of possible violence with the knowledge that educational opportunities are generally not so good in the south as in the north, even for those with white skins. in the first place we have not come back south with the idea that we are making a sacrifice. nor do we think that southern white people on the whole are moral monsters. the advantages our children will have as southerners will more than outweigh the disadvantages, although it is shameful that the same thing cannot as yet be said for negro children.it would be unfair and contrary to the facts to praise the south by deprecating the north, but it is appropriate to point out that we lived in connecticut, new york, illinois, and wisconsin and have found the people in those states, person for person, to be very much like the people of the south. both north and south have their hypocrites, their bigots, their areas of ignorance, their acts of violence and their injustices to minority groups, but both regions also have people of empathy, courage and vision. inconsistency is not confined to the south. cultural changes come slowly, especially to a land devastated by war and embittered by the lingering injustices left over from reconstruction days, when motives of vengeance and corrupt politics in the north and carpetbagger opportunism in the south played havoc with lincoln’s plea for “malice toward none, charity for all.” but changes must and will come. some southern white people in many walks of life have struggled against great odds to hasten these changes—people harassed on the one hand by ignorance, southern opportunist politicians and resistance to social change, and on the other hand by northern opportunist politicians and sometimes onesided newspaper reporting. emotion has prevailed. reason has thus far never had a fair chance. nor has the plight of southern  liberals been made easier by some northern white and negro liberals who, in their understandable eagerness for reform, have found it easy to overlook the fact that love and understanding are neceessary for the white southerner and his problems as well as for the black. doctrinaire liberalism has a special bigotry of its own. no man is really tolerant until he has made a serious effort to understand those who are intolerant. many southern people would not be so defensive and belligerant if they were understood and given the credit they deserve, however small that credit may be in racial matters. of course, i realize that no white man can really understand the bitterness and impatience that inevitably rise within negroes. while i deplore some attitudes and projected programs of the black muslims, and other similar negro groups, and hope for the eventual good of all mankind that the negro leadership such as that of martin_luther_king and the naacp will prevail; nevertheless, i am not so certain that i could now write as calmly as i do urging patience, tolerance and love were my skin black. i cannot asree with the black w muslims, but i think i can understand how they must feel. yet, since i cannot properly share the sense of outrage which burns within most negroes, perhaps i am insensitive and wrong in pleading for understanding from those who have never been understood.nevertheless, i still believe that two wrongs do not make a right, and i hope and expect that negro people will not in significant numbers generalize from particulars and hate or distrust all white men. negroes can abuse power too, and it will be a sad day for both black and white people if rights are won at the cost of that something down inside which keeps men and their societies sane and wholesome. it is unreasonable to expect any non-negro to adopt all negro methods and goals uncritically or be cast aside as not really understanding or caring. there are many of us who care a great deal and have at considerable hurt to ourselves taken on the fight of our negro brothers. but, understood or not, too many of us in the south have for too long gone north never to return and have lamented the fact that social change in the south is so slow. we may have our social views rejected if we return, but we are still accepted in a way that northerners with similar views seldom are. perhaps this is because we know better than to judge all white southerners by the violence or cowardice of some. perhaps, too, the liberal native white southerner knows by his own independent spirit that a proud people have to be respected and loved, even when they are wrong. i am glad that legal decisions, sit-ins, stand-ins, kneel-ins, freedom-riders, etc., are prodding the south into earlier actions than it might otherwise take in racial matters, but, however trite it may sound or however much it may be denied, the south for the most part must solve its own problems; although not in the ways proposed by some “inch-worm” white southerners, who are willing to go only one inch at a time with long periods of rest between such “progressive” moves. if the united states is to provide the leadership and example for true world democracy, i believe that leadership and example in race relations must come primarily from the south. while it is true that the average southern white man does not understand the neero so well as he thinks he does (and that probably goes for me too), it is, nevertheless, true that the southern white often feels an affection for the negro in a paradoxical, if sometimes paternalistic way, that many northerners with their secret fear of the nesro do not understand. it is my belief that racial problems in the north will never be satisfactorily laid to rest until they are first solved in the south. so much of vast importance for our country and the world depends upon how the proud, independent, sometimes violent and yet gentle spirit of the south's people, black and white, can be channeled into constructive social uses, i believe the south is equal to the challenge, and i have come home to help
'sick and tired of being sick and tired’
a  feet back ^ ^ from a narrow dirt £ road just off the state cy highway that cuts through ruleville, miss., is a small, three-room, white frame house with a screened porch. a large pecan tree grows in the front yard and two smaller ones grow out back. butter bean and okra plants are filling out in the gardens on the lots on either side of the house. lafayette street is as quiet as the rest of ruleville, a town of less than , located in sunflower county,  miles from the mississippi river. sunflower county, home of senator eastland and  per cent negro, is one of twenty-four counties in the north western quarter of the state—the delta—that make up the second congressional district. since , this district has been represented in congress by jamie whitten, chairman of the house appropriations subcommittee on agriculture, who is now seeking his thirteenth term. from the house on the dirt road there now comes a person to challenge jamie whitten: mrs. fannie lou hamer. mrs. hamer is a negro and only , negroes (or . per cent of voting-age negroes) were registered to vote in the second congressional district in . but in , when whitten was elected for the twelfth time, only , persons cast votes, although in  there were more than , persons of voting age in the district,  per cent of them negro. mrs. hamer’s bid is sponsored by the council of federated organizations, a mississippi coalition of local and national civil_rights organizations. until mississippi stops its discriminatory voting practices, mrs. hamer’s chance of election is slight, but she is waking up the citizens of her district. “i’m showing people that a negro can run for office,” she explains. her deep, powerful voice shakes the air as she sits on the porch or inside, talking to friends, relatives and neighbors who drop by on the one day each week when she is not out campaigning. whatever she is talking about soon becomes an impassioned plea for a change in the system that exploits the delta negroes. “all my life i’ve been sick and tired,” she shakes her head. “now i’m sick and tired of being sick and tired.” mrs. hamer was born october , , in montgomery county, the twentieth child in a family of six girls and fourteen boys. when she was  her family moved to sunflower county,  miles to the west. the family would pick fiftysixty bales of cotton a year, so my father decided to rent some land. he bought some mules and a cultivator. we were doin' pretty well. he even started to fix up the house real nice and had bought a car. then our stock got poisoned. we knowed this white man had done it. he stirred up a gallon of paris green with the feed. when we got out there, one mule was already dead. t'other two mules and the cow had their stomachs all swelled up. it was too late to save 'em. that poisonin' knocked us right back down flat. we never did get back up again. that white man did it just because we were gettin' somewhere. white people never like to see negroes get a little success. a ll of this stuff is no secret in the state of mississippi. mrs. hamer pulled her feet under the worn, straight-backed chair she was sitting in. the linoleum under her feet was worn through to another layer of linoleum. floor boards showed in spots. she folded her large hands on her lap and shifted her weight in the chair. she’s a large and heavy woman, but large and heavy with a power to back up her determination. we went back to sharecrop pin’, halvin’, it’s called. you split the cotton half and half with the plantation owner. but the seed, fertilizer, cost of hired hands, everything is paid out of the cropper’s half. later, / dropped out of school. i cut corn stalks to help the family. my parents were gettin’ up in age—they weren’t young when i was born, i was the twentieth child—and my mother had a bad eye. she was cleanin’ up the owner’s yard for a quarter when somethin’ flew up and hit her in the eye. so many times for dinner we would have greens with no seasonin’ . . . and flour gravy. my mother would mix flour with a little grease and try to make gravy out of it. sometimes she’d cook a little meal and we’d have bread. no one can honestly say negroes are satisfied. we’ve only been patient, but how much more patience can we have? fannie lou and perry hamer have two daughters,  and , both of whom they adopted. the hamers adopted the older girl when she was bom to give her a home, her mother being unmarried. “i’ve always been concerned with any human being,” mrs. hamer explains. the younger girl was given to her at the age of  months. she had been burned badly when a tub of boiling water spilled, and her large, impoverished family was not able to care for her. “we had a little money so we took care of her and raised her. she was sickly too when i got her, suffered from malnutrition. then she got run over by a car and her leg was broken. so she’s only in fourth grade now.” the older girl left school after the tenth grade to begin working. several months ago when she tried to get a job, the employer commented, “you certainly talk like fannie lou.” when the girl replied, “she raised me,” she was denied the job. she has a job now, but mrs. hamer explains, “they don’t know she’s my child.” the intimidation that mrs. hamer’s older girl faces is what mrs. hamer has faced since august , . on that day she and seventeen others went down to the county courthouse in indianola to try to register to vote. from the moment they arrived, police wandered around their bus, keeping an eye on the eighteen. “i wonder what they’ll do,” the bus driver said to mrs. hamer. halfway back to ruleville, the police stopped the bus and ordered it back to indianola. there they were all arrested the bus was painted the wrong color, the police told them. after being bonded out, mrs. hamer returned to the plantation where the hamers had lived for eighteen years. my oldest girl met me and told me that mr. marlowe, the plantation owner, was mad and raisin’ cain. he had heard that i had tried to register. that night he called on us and said, “we're not ready for that in mississippi now. if you don’t withdraw, i’ll let you go.” i left that night but “pap”—that’s what i call my husband—had to stav on till work on the plantation was through. in the spring of last year, mr. hamer got a job at a ruleville cotton gin. but this year, though others are working there already, they haven’t taken him back. according to mississippi law the names of all persons who take the registration test must be in the local paper for two weeks. this subjects negroes, especially delta negroes, to all sorts of retaliatory actions. “most negroes in the delta are sharecroppers. it's not like in the hills where negroes own land. but everything happened before my name had been in the paper,” mrs. hamer adds. she didn’t pass the test the first time, so she returned on december , and took it again. “you’ll see me every  days till i pass,” she told the registrar. on january , she  returned and found out that she had passed. “but i still wasn’t allowed to vote last fall because i didn’t have two poll-tax receipts. we still have to pay poll tax for state elections. i have two receipts now.” after being forced to leave the plantation, mrs. hamer stayed with various friends and relatives. on september , night riders fired sixteen times into the home of one of these persons, mrs. turner. mrs. hamer was away at the time. in december, , the hamers moved into their present home which they rent from a negro woman. mrs. hamer had by then begun active work in the civil_rights movement. she gathered names for a petition to obtain federal commodities for needy negro families and attended various southern christian leadership conference (sclc) and student nonviolent coordinating committee (sncc) workshops throughout the south. since then she has been active as a sncc field secretary in voter registration and welfare programs and has taught classes for sclc. at present, most of her time is spent campaigning. in june of last year, mrs. hamer was returning from a workshop in charleston, s. c. she was arrested in winona, in montgomery county,  miles east of indianola, the county in which she was born. along with others, she was taken from the bus to the jail.they carried me into a room and there was two negro boys in this room. the state highway patrolman gave them a long, wide blackjack and he told one of the boys, “take this,” and the negro, he said, “this what you want me to use?” the state patrolman said. “that’s right, and if you don’t use it on her you know what i’ll use on you.” i had to get over on a bed flat on my stomach and that man beat me . . . that man beat me till he give out. and by me screamin’, it made a plain-clothes man—he didn’t have on nothin’ like a uniform —he got so hot and worked up he just run there and started hittin’ me on the back of my head. and  was tryin’ to guard some of the licks with my hands and they just beat my hands till they turned blue. this negro just beat me till i know he was give out. then this state patrolman told the other negro to take me so he take over from there and he just keep beatin’ me. the police carried mrs. hamer to her cell when they were through beating her. they also beat annelle ponder, a sclc worker who was returning on the bus with her, and lawrence guyot, a sncc field secretary who had traveled from the greenwood sncc office to investigate the arrests. they whipped annelle ponder and i heard her screamin’. after a while she passed by where l was in the cell and her mouth was bleedin’ and her hair was standin’ up on her head and you know it was horrifyin’. over in the night i even heard screamin’.  said, “oh, lord, somebody else gettin’ it, too.” it was later that we heard that lawrence guyot was there. i got to see him. i could walk as far as the cell door and / asked them to please leave that door open so / could get a breath of fresh air every once in a while. that’s how / got to see guyot. he looked as if he was in pretty bad shape. and it was on my nerves, too, because that was the first time i had seen him and not smilin’. after i got out of jail, half dead, i found out that medgar evers had been shot down in his own yard. mrs. hamer paused for a moment, saddened by the recollection. i glanced around the dim room. faded wallpaper covered the walls and a vase, some framed photos, and a large doll were placed neatly on a chest and on a small table. three stuffed clowns and a small doll lay on the worn spread on the double bed in the comer. both the small doll and the larger one had white complexions, a reminder of the world outside. we’re tired of all this beatin’ we're tired of takin' this. it’s been a hundred years and we're still being beaten and shot at, crosses are still being burned, because we want to vote. but i'm goin’ to stay in mississippi and if they shoot me down, i’ll be buried here. but  don't want equal rights with the white man; if i did, i’d be a thief and a murderer. but the white man is the scardest person on earth. out in the daylight he don't do nothin'. but at night he’ll toss a bomb or pay someone to kill. the white man’s afraid he'll be treated like he’s been treatin' negroes, but l couldn't carry that much hate. it wouldn’t solve any problem for me to hate whites just because they hate me. oh, there's so much hate. only god has kept the negro sane. as part of her voter-registration work, mrs. hamer has been teaching citizenship classes, working to overcome the bad schooling delta negroes have received, when they receive any at all. “we just have nice school buildings,” she says. in sunflower county there are three buildings for , negroes of high school age, six buildings for , white high school students. in -, the county spent $ per white pupil, $ per negro pupil. when applying to register, persons as part of the test must interpret the state constitution but, mrs. hamer says, “mississippi don’t teach it in school.”  the negro schools close in may, so that the children can help with the planting and chopping; they open again in july and august, only to close in september and october so that children can pick cotton. some stay out of school completely to work in the fields. mississippi has no compulsory schoolattendance law; it was abolished after the  supreme court school-desegregation decision. many negro children do not attend school simply because they have no clothes to wear. mrs. hamer has helped distribute clothing sent down from the north. “we owe a lot to people in the north,” she admits. “a lot of people are wearing nice clothes for the first time. a lot of kids couldn’t go to school otherwise.” one time when a shipment arrived for distribution, the ruleville mayor took it upon himself to announce that a lot of clothes were being given out. more than  negroes showed up and stood in line to receive clothes. mrs. hamer, combining human compassion and politicking, told them that the mayor had had nothing to do with the clothing distribution and that if they went and registered they wouldn’t have to stand in line as they were doing. many went down and took the registration test. “a couple weeks ago when more clothes arrived,” she relates, “the mayor said that people could go and get clothing, and that if they didn’t get any they should just go and take them. i went and talked to the mayor. i told him not to boss us around. ‘we don’t try to boss you around,’ i told him.” obviously, fannie lou hamer will not be easily stopped. “we mean to use every means to try and win. if i lose we have this freedom registration and freedom vote to see how many would have voted if there wasn’t all this red tape and discrimination.” if mrs. hamer is defeated by jamie whitten in the primary, she will also file as an independent in the general election. last fall, sncc voter-registration workers attempted to register in freedom-registration books all those not officially registered. these negroes then voted in an unofficial freedom vote campaign, choosing between democrat paul johnson, now governor, republican rubel phillips, and independent aaron henry, state naacp chairman. henry received , votes. the same thing will be done this summer, and if mrs. hamer loses, the freedom vote total will be used to challenge whitten’s election. backing up the discrimination charges are nine suits the federal government has pending in seven second congressional district counties, including a suit in sunflower county where, in , only . per cent of voting-age negroes were registered. a mississippi freedom democratic party is also being formed which will hold meetings on every level within the state, from precinct on up, finally choosing a delegation to the national democratic convention that will challenge the seating of the regular all-white mississippi delegation. in addition to mrs. hamer, three other mississippi negroes are running for national office in the  elections. james monroe houston will challenge robert bell williams in the third congressional district, the rev. john e. cameron faces william meyers colmer in the fifth, and mrs. victoria jackson gray is campaigning for the senate seat now held by john stennis. this extensive program provides a basis for negroes organizing throughout the state, and gives a strong democratic base for the freedom democratic party. the wide range of negro participation will show that the problem in mississippi is not negro apathy, but discrimination and fear of physical and economic reprisals for attempting to register. the freedom democratic candidates will also give mississippians, white as well as negro, a chance to vote for candidates who do not stand for political, social and economic exploitation and discrimination, and a chance to vote for the national democratic ticket rather than the mississippi slate of unpledged electors. “we been waitin’ all our lives,” mrs. hamer exclaims, “and still gettin’ killed, still gettin’ hung, still gettin’ beat to death. now we’re tired waitin’!”
by tom f. driver
closing notice is snr ? up, and i am left to \ ii £ sing the blues for blues v£> <f) for mister charlie. during its brief career i went twice to see james baldwin’s play on broadway. for one thing i wanted more of the performance by diana sands, the best any american actress has given all season. for another i wanted to make sure whether the play’s faults were really enough to force its closing, as some critics seem to think, or whether, as i suspected, its virtues did it in. i am now ready to maintain the latter and to see in this a phenomenon of some social importance, but before arguing the point let me pay homage to the lady. diana sands first came among us some years ago in raisin in the sun, a soap opera for dark skins and light consciences not much to my liking. it required miss sands merely to be pert, which she was, and nothing more. my joy at seeing her unfold in the baldwin play was great. in the third act she had a long soliloquy, a lament for her dead lover, in which she poured over the theater a libation of anger, love and blasphemy. the sexual language of this speech is direct. it demands to be uttered without shame. miss sands did it with such conviction that her dignity increased with each revealing line. furthermore, she played it at the top of the emotional register, shouting, weeping and pounding the air with her fists, an indulgence few performers could risk without disaster. here was acting in the grand manner. after putting it to the test of a second viewing, i can report that it lost nothing in the repetition. honor to miss sands for bringing it off, to burgess meredith, her director, for letting her do it, and to james baldwin for writing words to make it possible. 
he play itself is based—“very distantly,” as baldwin has said—on the case of emmett till, murdered in  by a white man who was acquitted but who later confessed. in the play the murderer’s guilt is clear from the start, and so is the acquittal the jury will give. a negro youth (a freeman jr.), rebellious and unstable to the point of courting death, runs afoul of a poor white (rip torn) with enough pride of race and insecurity of personality to pull the trigger. baldwin is interested in these two men only as types. his portrayal of them is therefore in sketch but with absolute mastery of detail. from these sketches our eyes are led to watch the town’s reaction to the murder. the whites form an almost solid front, that abstraction called justice being less real to them than their fear. the front is broken —at any rate cracked—by parnell, a newspaper owner (in which role pat hingle gave the best performance he has ever brought us). a confidant of both the victim’s father and the murderer, he tries to remain friends with both while seeing that justice is done. this, of course, is impossible; and when, on the witness stand, he has to choose, it is the truth he lets go. among the blacks, the most important reaction we watch is that of the boy’s clergyman father (percyrodriguez). he has long been a spokesman and a bargainer for civil_rights. he becomes an agitator ready to take up arms. the play is about the breakdown of “moderation” in the face of antagonisms that are by nature irrational and immoderate. james baldwin’s forte has never been the making of plots, the structuring of fiction, nor the psychological delineation of character. he is first and last a preacher. but preaching in the theater is by no means always a fault, let alone something bad for the box office. in the deputy broadway has a sermon that is a solid hit, and the lincoln center repertory has an other in after the fall. neither is written half as well as blues for mister charlie. the only trouble with sermons is that the more they are needed the less they are liked. the terms in which james baldwin chose to address his audience are not the terms in which they have wanted to listen. on the one hand, he alienated a large part of the liberal intelligentsia by paying scant attention to the political and economic roots of segregation. marxist and socialist theory have not detained him. absent also is any concern with the structure of american law and the elective process. in other words, baldwin stepped right outside the context in which most americans now see the racial struggle. to them, it is a question of “civil_rights,” a constitutional question coupled, perhaps, with problems of unemployment, job training and other economic factors. instead of talking about all this, baldwin has taken what will seem to many a reactionary step: he has described racial strife as racial strife, warfare between the black people and white people that is rooted in their separate ways of experiencing life, the difference symbolized in their sexuality. baldwin thus opened himself to two attacks that critics were not slow to make: that he had swallowed “the myth of negro sexual superiority,” and that his characters were caricatures. that is how it happened that robert brustein of the new republic saw eye to eye with howard taubman of the new york times, with whom he had intended strongly to disagree. they both uttered the damning judgment that the characters were stereotyped. as a matter of fact, no play about the negro has ever been seen in america that represented small-town southern white people more accurately than does blues for mister charlie. (i will not judge its representation of negroes in such a town, not having lived among them.) what the play sins against is not the reality down south but the social (hence aesthetic) myths up north. on the other hand, baldwin alienated the middle-class paying audience by presenting a view of the racial conflict that it fears is true. unlike lorraine hansberry, who wrote the box office success raisin in the sun, he did not flatter the audience by telling it what it wanted to believe—namely, that negroes have the same ambitions, aches and pains as other people. the moral of that message is that there is nothing to fear. james baldwin, by contrast, has been saying for some years, notably in the fire next time, that there is plenty to fear. he tells us in blues for mister charlie that negroes do not feel and think as white people and that the assumption they do is simply a manifestation of the white’s innate sense that his own values and experience are normative. the shape of the play is not a comic one of movement from problem to solution, which would be a kind of civic reassurance. it is a movement, in the negroes themselves, from “liberality” to warfare. as this movement is not comic, neither is it tragic. there is no catharsis in it. though baldwin is no brecht, the temper of his play is brechtian but not marxist. it is brechtian in avoiding both comedy and tragedy. it is brechtian in that it is a call to action rather than an imitation of action. it is brechtian in that it uses what people will think are stereotypes for the deliberate purpose of challenging received ideas. it asks us to reconsider whether the “stereotypes” may not be nearer the truth than the theory that explains them away. far from being, as some have charged, a “commercial” sort of play, this one has failed on broadway for the same reason brecht fails there: it frightens people by challenging the status quo, while at the same time it challenges their way of seeing the status quo. the social significance of blues for mister charlie lies in what it reveals about our fear of fear. it should be looked at side by side with the reaction many people made to the threatened “stall-in” at the world’s fair, the threat of water wastage proposed by brooklyn core, and other demonstrations that go beyond attack on specific injustices in a spirit of generalized protest. there is indeed something illogical in these actions. the public, including many white liberals, seems to see in them a threat of anarchy, and many negro leaders have warned that riots and the temporary breakdown of law enforcement can be expected. the north is discovering its kinship with the south, and its reaction is beginning to show itself as fear. at this point some of our fixed notions display their inadequacy, and the baldwin play becomes relevant. dogma has it that nothing stands in the way of racial harmony but the ill will of benighted southerners and other reactionaries who deny civil_rights to negroes. ill will can be cured in due time by education, preaching and better laws. this view is so utterly rational and progressivist in character that it cannot accommodate into its understanding irrational antagonisms between racial groups. hence it declares, contrary to much evidence, that sexual envy, which no doubt is irrational, has nothing to do with the problem. when a baldwin says that it does, for negro as well as white, he is said to be a purveyor of “myth.” the dogma, being designed to rule out fear, breaks down when fear becomes unavoidable. that is just where we are now. southern “moderates” have been there a long time. having no adequate resources to help them face that fear, having been told it was unrealistic, they became paralyzed by it and were notoriously ineffective in southern politics. power was exercised by the faubuses, barnetts and wallaces who, however unprincipled, were realistic enough to see that fear existed, that it was inevitable and action must be predicated on it. on the other side, negroes became a political force in the south by virtue of the fact that they, who had lived long in fear, ceased to be afraid of it. they did not eliminate it, could not and did not try it. but they ceased to try to avoid it, and in that moment their ineffectiveness ended. i do not deny that an awakened class or racial consciousness had its importance, but class consciousness without the courage to face fear is impotent. impotence born of the fear of fear is what has been overcome by negroes in the past  years, and it is what baldwin is talking about in the rev. meridian henry, who puts down his brief case and takes up his gun and his bible. the message is not very sophisticated, but it is true enough; and it could hardly be more to the point at a time when the paralysis of the southern “moderate” is creeping all over the country. the sober citizens of the north, midwest and west, if they do not want to be swept onto the sidelines in the next five or ten years, will have to learn that some (we don’t know how much) violence is unavoidable. they will have to learn that violence itself is far from the worst of evils, even in a peaceable democracy. the repression of violence by a force that perpetuates injustice is worse. the violence of terrified people is worse than the violence of brave men. moderates will have to know that fear is their lot. those who cannot risk when they are afraid, who cannot cope with anything but rational progress, will be made impotent by their fear; and their impotence will bring anarchy and violence all the closer. if baldwin’s play is offensive, or even just unrealistic, to them, they will find their moment of truth arrived too late.
the negro writer in the u.s. assembly at asilomar
early in august some two hundred people from all over the country—and from several foreign countries—converged on a rustic state park and conference grounds at california’s famed monterey peninsula to meet and talk with some of america’s black literary lions. they slept in the two dozen or so redwood lodges, took their meals in the huge cafeteria, and listened and argued and questioned in the chapel and in the lounges and in the brisk, sea-flavored open air. there was excitement, as when poet-playwright leroi jones, unleashing a whisper of his fiery temper, leveled the charge of “parasite” against so many literary critics. and there was nostalgia, calm but compelling, as when saunders redding, arna bontemps and horace cayton recalled their personal experiences with their great contemporary, the late richard wright. there was a moment when the attentive audience grew tense, perched on the edge of embarrassment, for it seemed that the occasion was imminent for a needless comparison of two poets’ work as the two poets sat on the podium. the auditorium was sprinkled with partisans of the younger poet, a firebrand like themselves, ready to do public battle. but the older poet is also a great lady and, while she had no need to concede any corner, there being no qualitative monopoly on artistic approach, she was all grace. said gwendolyn brooks of leroi  jones: “he is a master of language.” but all was not so temperate. at one point, two california claimants to literary distinction drew their verbal sabers and clashed before  startled eyes. in keeping with his style, professor robert bone, a program sub for a missing star, “put down” the aging poet kenneth rexroth. and the poet, whose supply of ego is plentiful, screamed back across the room, “don’t patronize me,” with accompanying adjectives which are unprintable. it all happened following the reading of a literary paper, but there was the strong suspicion that the  two men had brought their mutual animosities with them. there might have been other even more blazing battles had the conference lived up to its billing. but james baldwin, who found europe more rewarding for the moment, did not arrive, and there were reasons to believe that ralph ellison, for whom apologies were made on the morning of his scheduled appearance, never intended to show up. among mr. baldwin’s waiting detractors were both mr. bone and mr. rexroth, and mr. jones has yet to confront mr. ellison in the wake of his highly (the word is used advisedly) negative review of mr. jones’ the blues people. literary feuds aside, the conference on “the negro writer in the united states” turned out to be, more than less, an occasion for airing the intricacies and implications of the civil_rights struggle. which surprised no one. the “race problem” is an inevitable trap for the negro writer, and there is no honest escape. nor is there any objective reason why there should be. even baldwin and jones, after disclaiming any necessity for writing “protest” literature, find that their work nevertheless falls into that category. only ellison, looking down from his personal olympus, continues to talk as if considerations of art are above and beyond the question of involvement. but it remained for ossie davis, that full-spirited actor-playwright, to put everything into perspective with an injection of healing humor. acting out all the roles from a scene in his purlie victorious, he achieved just the right mood for conciliation and acceptance. and then he proceeded to tell it like it is. “the basic task of the writer, white or black, is to truly describe america to itself,” mr. davis said at one point. and then he got down to the root of the matter: “the negro writer has to write protest, and it must be loud and bitter and aimed at corrective action.” and an emphatic “amen.”
langston hughes and the fantasy or harlem
here is never any ^ t ||—\ f ending to the poet’s song, and the memory of each theme commits him to the eternal struggle of interpreting what other men are content to experience.  critic, to analyze so-called negro literature beyond the concept of traditional form. they must go back to the roots, to the rat-infested jungles, to the houses without windows, and to the faces forgetting that hope does exist. they must taste the strange aperitifs of poverty and despair as they are prepared for the symbolic harlem of hughes’ poetry and prose. it is high time for the negro artist to lead them there. the poetic odyssey of langston hughes began in cleveland, ohio. it was there that he was selected class poet while attending high school. he accepted the challenge of meters, stanzas, and forms because they seemed much easier to deal with than ditches and dishes. they also seemed to offer adventure; so off to the sea he went. as a sailor he learned the value of land; it became more than soil, houses and fences. the land was power! the land was science and politics. the land owners ruled the world. after the spell of the sea wore off, he tried earning a living with his hands. he also tried book learning at college, and then journeyed to mexico where his land-owning father attempted to reunite his family after a long separation. the next decade would take him to the four corners of the world; but, before then, there was harlem. a number of his lesser poems turned up in the little magazines and in the form of pamphlets.  crisis, the official organ of the n.a.a.c.p., called him “son.” the labor movement intrigued him. the socialist and workers’ party heard in his plain language the inexplicable cry of the common man. his early poems offered music to the weary ears of the little guy. vachel lindsay hailed him, discovered him as a waiter and busboy. his little poems of free verse had freed him; and finding freedom for himself, he was obliged to seek freedom for others. the gods would provide many blessings: a patron, a place to work, a place to hide, a trip through the southland, a movie in russia, a folk opera, short stories, a first book of poems, a novel, friends, foes, more poems, tighter stories, a broadway play, and finally the omnipresent jesse semple. and what of harlem? the gift that gave the gods to him. what is the poetry of? how deep are the roots? what does it mean to be a black poet in a white world? why black? why not just a poet? who calls the shots? and what about harlem? the sweet flypaper of life! the paradox of the wind and rain and sun climbing the backs of domestics, porters, elevator operators. what mysterious realms separate her from the mainland? can the poet, langston hughes, speak of the city within the city and not speak of the white man’s concept of her alienness, her ugliness? can the poet, langston hughes, find in her dark obsessions the gift of metaphor, simile, and aliteration? can the figurative patterns of negro speech be put to jazz? can the human voice with all of its living modulations be made colorless? can the strict metrical requirements of good verse give way to the speech of life? black life! is god really black? is the face of a negro child no less beautiful than the face of a child of any land, of any race? harlem. the hughes’ harlem of imperfectability. harlem, arising in the sun. harlem. sweet everlasting harlem of blazing lights and richard wright freezing at night in his thin overcoat working out his salvation as a native son. harlem. the natural symbol of misery. the national symbol of a country’s forked tongue and twisted pride. harlem, echoing her monosyllabic words to the sophisticated deaf ears of her congress, her presidents, her critics. harlem. where does the poet langston hughes fit? yes! “i have known rivers older than the flow of human blood. my soul has grown deep like the rivers.” yes! “my old pa died in a fine big house.” but, “i wonder where i’m going to die being neither white nor black.” sweet harlem! they walk in the day and dream at night. from th to th he sees the neo-classical beauty of a whore’s twisted mouth, and the bottles of juice stuffed in back pockets, behind doors, in trash cans, under the sinks. and why is the juice more meaningful than the constitution or cousin jake down in mississippi? why is the soup kitchen more powerful than the gospel, and the welfare worker more real than christ? what is the cause? is it my blackness? is it your unconcern? what does this poet see? what does he mean, “let america be america again?” harlem, your fantasy has lead him to your gruesome face caught in the full fury of your impassioned plight. the nautical mile ends with the soft light of boys who would be men if men would make themselves known. the fantasy ends when the banks of your river rise up to match the tide of america’s indifference. when the rats become lilies growing in front yards. when the young see through the fa$ade of their own bitterness and take the land to be their own. when the true beauty of harlem is spoken of and learned like the pledge of allegiance. when the people buy books to read books. when the lawyers practice law. when the politicians politic for the people. when the cadillac owners sell-out and sugar hill is no longer sweet. when time and life and look learn what to see and whom to ask. when paul robeson comes home and jesse semple has no other place to condemn. when the sun falls on her belly and covers the world because time has come to an end; and your poet, like the merchant, shall have nothing more to sell. i think i see your doom, harlem. langston hughes has known it all the while. he has known your beauty, but you would not let your poet tell the world. laugh, harlem, laugh! the joke is too universal, too ironic, too beautiful, for you and your poet alone. another fantasy begins. the freedom riders never board the “a” train. the seeminglv wild young men of stall-ins are a different breed. they have a harlem unlike the caricatures of your poet’s best stories and sketches. they have arrived for the show-down! they are not impressed with the intellectual milieu of greenwich village nor the distant echoes of their job-conscious fathers and mothers. let america become america again has become real for them. and what of harlem? what has happened to the harlem of langston hughes? where are the solemn faces? where are the countee cullens and the alain lockes? what happened to the subtleties? what happened to the dancing girls and the night people spreading joy and spilling juice at the wonder bar? your face has changed. the world of langston hughes has come of age. he had made laughter a precious thing, for horror rides the subways. for thirty years he has tried to make you laugh at yourself; but humor and the forces of evil do not mix. no other poet of your history, either past or present, has known your shame and self-respect so well. time changes the past. the rats are the graven images of what time has failed to do for you. the poetry of your face cries for new symbolism and new words. we shall never know the fading symbol of thick-lips and bulging eyes in our generation. time changes the nature and order of things; but the poet’s song is never ending
direct action
the library was a t ^j stuffy place to study £ race relations. judy * confided this to her friend as they exited from the great doors. let the stone busts breathe the sacred wisdom; inhale it, exhale it too. judy sat on the cool abutment and stared at her girl friend’s sandals; then into the spring sunlight that reflected in the concrete steps. she yawned, pulled her brown hair over her eyes, and emitted a soft groan of inertia. roxanne, bouncy as her fluff of red hair, laughed. judy, a three-pointsix student, moaning over a simple theme! “i’m sick of stripping facts out of books,” judy said. yet she was apprehensive about her newest plan too. direct action was not for the sensitive. the bay cities were ideal for her project. pickets, mass arrests, limp bodies, black marias. common sights. but her reports were black and white— like the headlines that screamed unrest from corner stands. her paper on black muslims was rated superior; and the phony buyers at grocery shop-ins: grade-a; picketing the trial of a cop who mishandled a negro: so good it was read in class. (“is a person right or wrong because he is a cop or a negro?”) nearly all the facts, judy complained, came from printed matter. juggled and rehashed. it’s research when you steal from the many. what a gas. “crazy,” roxanne gasped. “your best themes came from close-ups! you watched in the sheraton lobby and wrote what you saw. don’t tell me.” sure, sure. roxanne knew it all. but the reports were mostly contrasts. mink-coated matrons staring at disheveled pickets. (“should sleep-ins wear fancy dress for twenty-hour duty?”) colorful, descriptive, vivid—and inhuman. judy jerked at her hair till her head was sacked, a spray of plastics gone tacky. her method was blinding, like her hair. the more she studied and observed the less she knew. her final paper would be a grade-a flop. if she could really talk to one black person—penetrate him in depth—it would reveal more than statistics, de facto facts, and flashy language about the angry versus the responsible. one—just one black human. “i can see it now,” roxanne chimed, “judy callagh—sophomore sociologist—walking the park. one hand caressed in a black one, and the other holding up a list of questions.” “oh god, rox, i’m not that primitive! you’ve been glued to the late show.” “and whom do you plan to interview?”  judy parted her hair, uncovering a dark glance. “take the needle off the jazz. you mean what cat will i prowl with?” she smirked at her own cleverness. roxanne laughed. “hmmm, the truth is in the middle—somewhere. okay, who?” “black zeus.” roxanne whirled on her. “him! judy, you couldn’t. you wouldn’t date him!” “i have.” “mary and jesus,” roxanne cried. “goatee. off-campus agitator. coffee-house statue. jazz buff. purple beret. no socks.” “the same.” % roxanne’s mouth opened and she clutched judy’s wrist. judy felt angry talons digging her veins. “honest judy, he’ll lay you so fast you won’t have time to scream rape.” judy spoke up bravely. “fine. we’ll get that over with. then we can get down to business.” there was a long silence before roxanne spoke. “any qualms, judy?” judy shook her head at the foolish question. really, inter-racial dating was common as ... as young profs who pray for hipness. after all. no, nnno, the only twinge was her father. as they strolled away roxanne, resigned, assured her there was no sweat—don’t tell him. “oh, i know you’ll tell him,” roxanne added, “you always do. but i still say there’s no sweat. he’s easy going.” judy plucked a hedge leaf and played with it. “he’s liberal, yes,” she said. “but he can be outspoken, too.” they parted under the pepper trees at judy’s brown gingerbread house. roxanne stifled a chuckle as she whispered, “stay away from the hills, honey.” black zeus and judy climbed through knee-deep wild oats till they reached the highest fire road. it was steep and when they crawled over the last brink they slumped in the short lush grass, panting and laughing. the tilden eucalyptus grove was above, a shaggy forest with its hair down. across the vale was a sloping golf course where sunday drivers pulled at their club carts. judy was surprised at black zeus’s new demeanor. wearing a coffee picker’s straw hat, light slacks, and hiking doggers, he was like a mexican vine-tender in her native saratoga. not at all like his street image. three days earlier, when she made her first pitch, she had been nervous. but an hour ago, when she called for him at the caffe mediterraneum, her attitude had changed as much as his appearance. even in the cosmopolitan scene people stared. but she felt newly smart. the attention said to her: “there goes a hip-gal. what dare, what poise!” they could see over the golf hill to the bay. in the misty distance the golden gate bridge spanned its graceful authority from bank to % bank. “it’s a cool view,” he said. “i’m glad you asked me up here.” his voice was velvety, the tone easy and sustained. “nutty—but i’ve never seen it before. when you first asked me i thought: ‘crazy, a coolschool maid—in the woods!’ ” “well?” he snapped his fingers. “still crazy. what’s the theory behind it?” “must there be one?” “gotta.” his black goatee pointed a challenge at her. judy toyed with the rough fibers of a tiny plant. “myself, i don’t believe in mixed marriages. oh, i mean it’s okay—for those who want it. but / couldn't take all those fringe problems.” she looked up at his brown flesh and yellow straw against the azure. “tell me, what kind of white girls go for mixed dating? what’s the theory behind it?” “hey, that’s my question!” he glanced at judy’s tanned face, laughing. “i asked first,” she said, conscious that her dodge was a whopper. “uh, lemme see. the brand of pink-cheeks who date us niggahs? . . .” judy flew at him. “don’t say it like that!” black zeus showed her his superior smirk. “it’s my personal privilege, cookie. get it? i mean it’s a freedom of sorts . . . oh hell, i’m sorry. well—why the broads go for - it, eh? excitement. sex. it’s ‘in’ to talk about it—after. they wanna see what’s under the rug.” he shrugged. “maybe they like to smell the subterranean scene. i dunno. oh, a few mixed couples are sincere.” they climbed till they reached the summit near the thicket, doggers, slacks, flat-heels, and black capris parted the tasseled grasses. puffing, they sat on a solid granitecolored bluff. they were conquerors, smugly surveying the sprawled masses all around the bayshore. “gold is my gal-color,” he said, “like fried trout. the pale dolls assume they’re improving a bloodand-pink gig. mmm, sweet charity.” he kissed his fingertips. “what type am i?” it was a patronizing question she couldn’t resist. he looked at her. she saw the pudgy lips part to reveal gleaming teeth. “that’s exactly what i’ve been wondering,” he said. “you seem to be taking me serious. that’s a scare—with any chick. i mean i don’t get it. not that i’m bored by your company. but you’re the first rosy-cheek to take me serious. yet i suspect you’re not taking me seriously—just my race. what’s the angle?” judy thought, “the way he looks at me . . . well, he knows what he wants my angle to be.” but she said, “i told you three days ago.” black zeus groaned. “ye gods, judy, there’s one reason i wanted to come here. to get away from the problem. i just want to see the  scenery—with human eyes. smell the flowers with human nostrils. listen to the birds with human ears. here i can be me—not a goddam problem.” “i’m sorry.” he was blank for a moment. then he dug at his cigarette pocket. flipping the lighter he touched the tip of her smoke, then his. blue clouds merged in the clear air as he spoke. “it’s okay, judy. what can i tell you?” she sucked hard with each draw and tried to remember her questions. one by one they came, till she felt like the school girl she was. what did negroes think of the sitins, shop-ins, stall-ins, bulldozer blocking? freedom riders? snick and core? he should relax, breathe deeply of nature, and react normally. black zeus shook his head. “lovin’ jesus, judy, i’m no authority on what we think of all that. sure, i should dig it—but i’m a backslider. i’ve got my own miseries. what do white women think of careers? homemaking? sex on the side?” judy smiled wryly, ashamed of her ignorance. she had goofed it. even before she’d finished her own questions she knew this. it wasn’t the way it was planned. and before he’d taunted her with his comeback the clear insight had come. being black was like belonging to a heavy-laden corporation. and zeus was no organization man. he was an individual. or he struggled to be. well, judy, remember the beefs to rox! the personal plane, girl. “oh,” she cried, “look at the bay. the sailboats are toys on a fairy lake.” zeus smiled as smoke steamed from his mouth and nostrils. “sweet mamma nature,’’ he beamed. “mother of the year. groovey.” laughing, they strolled hand in hand up a gentle rise, toward the grove. “what if we walked a birmingham street like this?” she asked. he shuddered. judy, feeling his sudden vibration, decided it was genuine. “are you crazy!” he thundered. “hey, is this part of your research?” “does it matter?” she glanced up at him. “lordy, i dream about this cussed paper . . . especially one night. in that dream i even kissed a negro.” “what was it like?” “it was salty.” black zeus jackknifed in laughter. “wanna find out for sure?” “well—why not?” a kiss is just a kiss. the next afternoon judy waited for roxanne at the crossroad of causes, as they called it—where the university’s stony esplanade pours into telegraph avenue. here the dedicated sat at folding tables heaped high with petitions, mimeo tirades, and passionate pamphlets. these praised or damned birchers, the bomb, marijuana laws, cuban  and canal policies—ad infinitum. volunteers ranged from budding revolutionaries to square-jawed preservers. judy watched the excited group roxanne was locked in. a solemn black muslim with white shirt and dark tie, waving a fistful of leaflets, was denouncing sammy davis and chubby checker. and roxanne’s red tresses blew in the breeze as she shook a psych workbook at him. “at least sammy and chubby married those blonde chicks!” the poor muslim, judy thought. rox likely egged him into it. roxanne was the type who had a hot spiel for brief periods. especially with newly-met people. they’d stare at her, wondering: “ooh, what a live one! where have i been all my life?” if rox wanted to make an impression she’d leave before running down. for this moment judy waited patiently. judy herself often plunged into the crossroad debates. but not today. she felt subdued in thought. the two girls shuffled through pedestrians along the avenue. at the curb were barreled plants and parked vehicles, mostly foreign miniatures—with a few domestic cars, current and vintage. judy’s ponytail flopped as she paced her steps—past the tobacco and magazine shop, the trade-in book stores, and the window displays of primitive religious art. at the mexican taco den, with its peppery smells mingling with traffic fumes, they turned. this was the day they’d begin search for a two-room flat, though they wouldn’t move for two more weeks. neither was bored at home (so they informed their confused parents), but a private apartment was inevitable. incoming friends would be less inhibited. this was their first real privacy of the day and judy knew roxanne was panting for news. but she volunteered nothing. “so you did romp the hills!” roxanne said. “. . . well?” “we counted woodticks,” judy said. “woodticks, toadshnicks! judy callagh, come to the scene. you know what i want to find out. was i right? am i a greek oracle?” judy’s smile was faraway, but amused. she nodded. judy felt her friend’s fingers digging into her shoulder, as one intent on destruction. the girls stopped. roxanne’s hard eyes soon melted into impelling, tingling curiosity. “what was it like, judy? i mean with a —” her voice was low, expectant. judy, feeling more angry than wisened, snapped at her. “god damn it, rox, you talk like a stinkin’ virgin. you know what it’s like!” for some time they walked silently. as they neared the apartment judy sensed the other’s smoldering hurt. she spoke up stoically. “you’re disappointed in me, aren’t you rox.” “. . . well, i try not to be,” roxanne said. “but a negro—i—” “okay, rox, shall we forget the apartment?” roxanne hesitated as both girls  stared down at the wistaria roots. “no, give me a few days. i’ll be okay, judy.” for several hours, till her date that night with black zeus, judy worked at her notes. she convinced herself she felt neither depressed nor exalted. her mother, at breakfast, had thanked her for the warning. she had no objections to the date but would lack the poise to be present. with friends she attended a campus lecture called, “the flavors of wine.” two older sisters were married and her brother ushered at a theatre. only her father was home. it was he zeus wanted to meet. they could talk jazz. judy had told him of her father’s vast collection of old seventy-eights. mr. callagh had not really listened to the records for years. he’d take pride in acquainting a young negro with the past culture of his own people. it was hard to believe he hadn’t heard bessie, noone, or pinetop. judy, curled softly on a lamplit sofa, listened to the men exchange backgrounds. her father, once a wine-vat jockey, now had his own package shop on grove. he saved and scrimped and invested. “and went broke twice in between,” judy injected, laughing. he pulled a face at his daughter. the red nose humped and the eyes pierced as he jerked at his swatch of gray hair. black zeus, with the keen-quick eyes of a carny barker, enjoyed the interchange. his name was really joe smith,  black zeus explained. but the nickname stuck, and anyway he liked the holy identity. his real name was very distinguished, mr. callagh said, as he’d see when he heard the records. judy sat wondering what was in her friend’s mind, yet sensing she could never really know—even if he spoke with scriptural clarity. he was once more a new person, both in manner and attire; he was neither the jumble of emotions as on the hill, nor yet a spouter of copied jargon—as in his usual dens. she had watched him now in three distinct settings. he changed with each. was it a personal characteristic? or was any negro skilled at adapting himself to what the white world expected? color consciousness was stupid. yet pretending it didn’t exist was even more stupid. the community was in the agony of growing pains. that would be the core of her theme. she’d call it, “judging negroes one at a time: the barriers involved.” the talk from all three was easy, free, and yet it was hampered. by inexperience? or by nature itself? her father, sensing this, had prepared jumbo-sized vodkas. even this prompted an excuse. “i never listen to bessie smith sober,” he said, grinning. judy watched as the pair lost themselves in the eternal primitiveness of the blues. bessie’s slippery embellishments swelled out and filled the room, just as she dominated the horn and rhythm. “some people call me a hobo, some call me a bum—nobody knows my name, nobody knows what i’ve done . . .” her voice cried up from the depths of some private hell. and joe smith’s comet, sounding low and mean as a tailgate trombone, confirmed her every lament. the records were worn and sandy. it was like dusting off the family album and looking at pictures of back-when. the legato tragedies, the smashed piano thirds, the sensitive corroboration of the hom, each sound was the visit of an old friend. and old confusions too. she remembered, as a small girl, her parents and their friends sitting on the floor. listening, sipping, suffering with a vicarious sense of exaltation. there was a return of her ancient wondering. all that misery. who were all those slaves in the records? and why? why? maybe if people could drink and listen to blues forever . . . well, maybe they’d forget the love of blood and greed. but daylight always came. bottles were empty. and people began hating again. it was the way of the world. it was silly musings, judy thought. she finished her drink and started another. so did the men. she watched her father and black zeus. both were on the floor near the changer. their heads were bowed, drunk on the sad beauty of the old blues. black zeus was in the orgiastic throes of discovery. strange, strange, strange, judy kept thinking. he was lazy, indifferent, and unemployed. a sensitive lover, a sincerely clever adapter—but his was a world she couldn’t easily comprehend. what did it matter? he wasn’t her boy friend, just an amiable hipster who agreed to help a girl with her lessons. yet the impression stuck to her like memories of the music. he and i, he and i. and the men—weaving a little, laughing, talking. they nodded and argued and agreed and laughed again. yes, a negro was a natural philosopher—he had to be. and he was trapped into being a spokesman too. as the stack of records lowered so did the mark in the bottle. young woman’s blues, empty bed blues, send me to the ’lectric chair, and many others. then they began to talk race again and judy, despite the restraining warmth of the vodka, tensed. “i’m sure of one thing,” her father said, “a white man will always ask a negro the wrong question.” black zeus glanced up. “so?” “that’s what i say. what the hell.” they laughed. “down south,” zeus said, “the ofay ... i mean they never ask the wrong thing. they’re always right. that’s one thing, we don’t hafta guess.” “well,” her father said, a little bleary eyed, waving his glass, “you won’t have to guess here either . . . ’cause i’m a phony liberal.” judy jumped at him. “oh daddy, you’re not either!” “yes i am, yes i am,” he countered, shaking his head. “tell you what, mister joe smith, i hope you’ll come back again—especially after judy moves out.” he looked  over at his daughter. “—if she does,” meaning the choice was hers. judy and black zeus traded glances, then she looked down at the carpet. “that’s right,” her father said, “i hope you’ll come again and again. maybe you can hep me—i mean hip me—to this modem jazz.” he laughed a moment, then added. “yessir, i’m a phony—but honest to god i didn’t know it.” judy wanted to bolster him. she wanted to say, “the test isn’t now, but if i married a negro. i think you’d come through gracefully—in the end.” but of course she didn’t. she couldn’t have said it even if they were alone. communication, even with him, seemed difficult. black zeus shook hands and said he’d better leave. and thanks for a most illuminating evening. judy followed him to the porch. “see you around, cookie.” “sure,” she said. “goodnight . . . joe. it was a wonderful evening.” when she came in her father was gone. she heard him in the bathroom and called in a goodnight. then she went upstairs. judy undressed in the dark and fell on to the bed, intent on rationalizing herself to sleep. she hadn’t intended to let him have her in the hills. really she hadn’t, despite her smart talk beforehand. as she neared sleep, some hours later, she borrowed roxanne’s words and applied them to herself, “give me a few days—
literature, said a l frenchman named bonnard more than a century ago, is the expression of man. the goncourt brothers viewed the novelist as the historian of the present. for henry james the novel was “felt life.” these definitions, though somewhat dated, are most appropriate for our purposes, and will serve as a point of departure for our discussion of the portrayal of african society by contemporary negro african novelists. thus we shall be less concerned with style than with content; and, for the sake of clarity, we shall largely ignore the various classifications of novels. in his histoire du roman modern (history of the modern novel), published in , r. m. alberes lists an astounding number of such classifications, a random selection of which would include the baroque novel, the realistic novel, the post-realistic novel, the naturalistic novel, the psychological novel, the historical novel, the intimate novel, the polyphonic novel, the mystical novel, the ironical novel, the lyric novel, the picaresque novel, the novel of analysis, the novel of apprenticeship, the new novel, the anti-novel, science fiction, mystery stories, the de-centralized novel, and then something he calls the roman puzzle—the puzzle novel. obviously, therefore, a word about limitations is in order. the speaker is forced by linguistics to restrict himself to novels written in french or in english. this means that we shall, unfortunately, be unable to include works in yoruba, swahili, or any of the african languages. our second limitation is, perhaps, less serious. we shall focus on the african novel, which has been something of a stepchild, and has received less attention than african verse. nevertheless, the dividing line between literary genre in africa is indeed thin. a story, a fable, a poem often overlap. and there are passages of african prose more poetic than some of the modem verse we hear. as leopold sedar senghor points out in his preface to birago diop’s les contes d’amadou-koumba (the tales of amadou-koumba): “even within a given genre, the walls of the classification are porous.”  our third limitation stems from the authors themselves, and from their milieu. writing in a language that is not their mother-tongue, they depend for the most part on foreign publishers and foreign readers. “have you noticed,” asks a character in ousmane soce diop’s karim, “that many senegalese never open a newspaper or a serious book? they believe an education has to end when they walk out of the school door.” in un negre a paris (a negro in paris) bernard dadie of the ivory coast claims that some of his compatriots “boast that they have never opened a book written by a negro.” i would surmise that even the publications of presence africaine have many more european than african readers. another limitation is geographical. for several sub-saharan countries have as yet produced no novelist in french or english. there are indications, however, that new voices from many of these places will soon be heard. numerous anthologies are now appearing. i even saw one the other day in swedish. meetings of african writers have been held in paris, in rome, in kampala and elsewhere. magazines such as presence africaine, black orpheus and transition are providing outlets for new authors. five of our novelists are from senegal, and an equal number from south africa; two each from cameroon, the ivory coast and dahomey; one each from congo (brazzaville), guinea, niger, sierra leone and french guiana. we have included the latter because he pioneered in this field, and because his novels were inspired by twelve years in equatorial africa, and because no study of negro-african fiction could omit reference to rene maran. in a much-discussed volume, published in , dr. frantz fanon, a martiniquan psychiatrist, now dead, who became very prominent in the algerian fln, divided the writing of colonized authors into three periods. the first period, he said, is an assimilation period, when inspiration is european and one can easily tie up these works to a well-defined trend in european literature. the second period is one of pre-combat literature, when the colonized person has not yet become a part of his own people. he is satisfied with just reminiscing and he brings up old childhood memories, ancient legends which he will re-interpret according to a foreign aesthetic, according to a conception of the world that has been discovered abroad. sometimes, fanon says, this pre-combat literature will be dominated by humor and allegory. the third period, dr. fanon continues, is one of combat literature. now, instead of encouraging the lethargy of his people, the writer blows the bugle and he awakens them. this is a literature of combat, a revolutionary literature, a nationalistic literature. and during this period, men and women, he says, who had never even thought that they would take pen in hand to write for other people to read, are in prison, or they’re facing a firing squad, or they know they’re going to face a firing squad, and they sit down and they write as their hearts and as their passions dictate. now, with all due respect to the brilliance of dr. fanon’s expose, one can still question its applicability to negro-african literature, or more particularly, to the negroafrican novel, where the three periods seem to merge into one— that is, the assimilationist period, the period of pre-combat literature, and the period of combat literature. the first important french african novel, for example, rene maran’s batouala, which dates back to , is as scathing and as effective a condemnation of colonialism as any african work of fiction published since that date. and it has the additional advantage of being written with consummate artistry. the well-rounded picture of african life, the literary expression of african society, will of necessity reflect colonialism and its concomitants. but it will also include the many other facets of the african’s life—his culture, his problems, and his essential dignity. what i find objectionable in dr. fanon’s thesis is the implication that violence alone inspires the highest form of art, and the conscious, or unconscious attempt to make every negro-african author conform to a single pattern. a case in point is that of camara laye of guinea, whose excellent novel, uenfant noir (the dark child), was criticized by some of the author’s compatriots because in their opinion it was not a “livre de combat.” one critic, for example, admitted that laye is “an authentic poet,” but accused him of practicing art for art’s sake, and for not measuring up to the standards set by richard wright in black boy. i read a part of this african’s criticism: “on the contrary laye stubbornly closes his eyes to the most crucial realities, especially those realities that one has always been careful not to reveal to the general public. this guinean, my compatriot, hasn’t he ever seen anything except a peaceful, beautiful, motherly africa? is it possible that never once did he witness the tiniest little infraction by the colonial administration?” perhaps it did not occur to this critic that richard wright and camara laye were two distinct personalities, each writing his autobiography according to his individual talent and his personal experiences. despite the difference in their approach there is little doubt that black boy and the dark child were motivated by similar aspirations. wright, who exerted marked influence on mongo beti of cameroon, sembene ousmane of senegal and other african novelists, would surely have en dorsed camara laye’s statement: “our deepest and most sensitive characteristics are passion for independence and equality.” to justify this right to independence and equality, the negro-african novelist has used a wide variety of tactics. he has written subjectively, objectively, ironically, bitterly, sympathetically, in protest, or in defense. he has written autobiographical novels such as the dark child, climbie or down second avenue. he has written tales of the bush such as maran’s batouala or tutuola’s palm wine drinkard; stories of miners in johannesburg, or a striking railway worker in senegal; tales of the teeming urban centers, such as ekwensi’s people of the city, achebe’s no longer at ease, or beti’s ville cruelle (cruel city). he’s written legends, historical novels, tales of the transplanted african, and political novels such as peter abrahams’ a wreath for udomo and william conton’s the african. this approach has made his works more readable, has carried his message to different kinds of readers, and has emphasized the human qualities of his people. who, for example, could fail to be touched by camara laye’s poetic tribute to his mother? i’d like to quote from this, not just because i think it’s beautiful, but because in the english translation this dedication has been cut in half: femme noire, femme africaine,  toi ma mere je pense a toi. . o daman,  ma mere, toi qui me portas sur le dos, toi qui m’allaitais, toi qui gouvernas mes premiers pas, toi qui la premiere m’ou>vris les yeux aux prodigis de la terre, je pense a toi . . . femme des champs, femme des rivieres, femme du grand fleuve,  toi, ma mere, je je pense a toi . . . all of that is deleted in the english translation. and then the last little sentence: femme noire, femme africaine  toi, ma mere, merci; merci pour tout ce que tu fis pour moi, ton fils, si loin, si pres de toi! “black woman, african woman, oh you, my mother, thank you; thank you for all that you did for me, your son, so far, and yet so near to you.” such is the dedication. but the novel ends with the hero on a plane headed for paris to continue his education. this is the conflict between the old and the new, between tradition and innovation that underlies most of the negro-african novels. basically, it began with the arrival of the european. in one of maran’s stories, bokorro, the python, asks moumeu, the crocodile, “what’s a white man?” “a white man is a man who is not black,” moumeu replies, and then adds, “but the white man knows how to handle the lightning.” our authors found that the white man had brought education and exploitation, hospitals and haughtiness, christianity and colonial ism, money and misery, knowledge but not wisdom, progress but not partnership. the african wanted the progress, but he also wanted to retain the more human aspects of his own culture. in the words of ezekiel mphahlele, the south african exile, “i admire the white man’s achievements, his mind that plans tall buildings, powerful machinery. i used to want to justify myself and my own kind to the white man. i later discovered that it wasn’t worth it. it was to myself and to my kind i needed to justify myself. “i think now that the white man has no right to tell me how to order my life as a social being or order it for me. he may teach me how to make a shirt or how to read and to write, but my forebears and i could teach him a thing or two, if only he would listen and allow himself time to feel. africa is no more for the white man who comes here to teach and to control her human material forces and not to learn.” (incidentally, my friend mphahlele is a very ardent critic of negritude and i point out to him the negritude in this particular passage, to his dismay.) this kind of passage, indicating partial but by no means total rejection of european values, inspires janheinz jahn to write in muntu, “the africans could become black europeans if they wished, but they do not want to do so, as their representatives unanimously insist. nor do they wish to preserve their inherited culture in all its details. but they do want to preserve its basic conception of which they have become conscious in their contact with other cultures.” our novelists reject, among other things, the white man’s greed, his arrogance, his forced labor segregated churches, his hypocrisy, his injustice. a surprising number of characters in these novels are in prison, often without sufficient justification. batouala spends two weeks in jail, simply because the commandant took the word of an unscrupulous interpreter. you remember the scene: batouala was the village chieftain and his people hadn’t brought in enough rubber and so the commander, speaking through an interpreter, of course, chided batouala and told him he’d have to do better next time. the interpreter was, as i said, unscrupulous, and he proceeded to tell batouala, the commander says that you’ve got to bring him so many chickens and some cattle, and bring me your brother’s young sister; i’m going to marry her. well, batouala, who understood a little french, said, the commander didn’t say that. what’s he saying? the commander asked. oh, he called you a nasty name, the interpreter said, and so batouala went to jail. but that’s the way the interpreters worked back then in the days of colonialism. in coeur d’aryenne (the heart of an aryan) by jean malonga of congo (brazzaville) yoka is in carcerated because a european wants to seduce his wife; another african in the same novel is imprisoned because a white girl visited his home. dadie’s climbie is arrested on suspicion of being a trouble-maker. oyono’s toundi in une vie de boy is jailed because he knows that madame is having an affair with moreau, the prison warden. even meka, the law-abiding african of le vieux negre et la medaille, also by oyono of the cameroon, spends a night in jail because he drank just a little bit too much and fell asleep just a few hours after he had been decorated by the french. udomo is arrested for publishing an incendiary article called, “a call to the people: rise and be free.” likewise two characters in con ton’s the african are imprisoned for political reasons. a girl in people of the city is jailed for three months on suspicion of stealing a piece of cloth. the hero of achebe’s no longer at ease is arrested for accepting a bribe. down mphahlele’s second avenue, south africans are incarcerated for brewing or drinking beer. in view of the frequency with which the prison appears and reappears in these novels, one would almost be tempted to consider it the symbol of colonialism. but a host of other aspects, more of them far less gruesome, completes the picture. we learn in these pages what the africans eat and how they dress. we see them at work and at play. maran, achebe and beti describe their games and wrestling matches. we see them at the islamic school in cheikh hamidou kane’s uaventure ambigue, and we see them at the french school with ake loba, camara laye or bernard dadie; at the english school with conton; at a school in south africa with mphahlele. several novelists describe their dances. in the novels, in fact, we follow the african from birth to burial, stopping en route to learn about age groups, griots, totems, dancing, bride-price, courtship and marriage, listening to their venerable elders regret the traditions of the past and to their young men debate the problems of the day. achebe tells us about an osu, a person dedicated to a god, a thing set apart, a taboo forever and his children after him. he can neither marry nor be married by the freeborn. onuora nzekwu’s hero in wand of noble wood cannot marry the girl who is under the curse of the iyi ocha. camara laye’s father learned the future from a little black snake; his mother also had strange powers. one day she was asked to help a man whose horse refused to get up. laye writes: “when we arrived at the pasture, we saw the horse. he was lying in the grass, gazing at us unconcernedly. his owner tried again to make him get up and spoke to him in honeyed tones, but the horse remained deaf to all entreaties. his master raised a hand to strike him. ‘don’t strike him,’ said my mother, ‘it won’t do any good.’ she went up to the horse and, lifting her own hand, declared solemnly, ‘if it is true that from the day of my birth i had knowledge of no man until the day of my marriage and if it is true that from the day of my marriage i’ve had knowledge of no man other than my husband, if these things be true, then i command you, stand up.’ “we all saw the horse get up and follow his master quietly away. i have told in very simple words and in very exact words what i saw then with my own eyes and to my mind it is unbelievable, but the event was just as i described it. the horse got up without any further delay and followed his master.” from thomas mofola, south africa, bernard dadie, ivory coast, birago diop, senegal, ousmane soce diop, senegal, jean malonga, congo (brazzaville), and others, we learn of the africans’ legends, some of which are built around historical characters such as chaka; others, around places such as the old empire of ghana. even more important for an understanding of the african life than these picturesque details and episodes are the many examples of what has been called la sagesse africaine—african wisdom. one finds this wisdom first expressed in various proverbs, original in their imagery, although universal in their appeal. from rene maran, for example: “you can make children, but you can’t make their character.” “stay alive is the first law of wisdom.” “you don’t hunt a lion and an antelope in the same way.” from birago diop: “one never knows how useful the backside is until one has to sit down.” “give your love to a woman, but not your trust.” “the hyena who wants to eat his offspring finds that they smell like a goat.” from ousmane soce diop: “in a country where people dance on one foot, the visitor must also dance on one foot.” from sembene ousmane: “money has not roots, but it grows in the heart.” “who knows the value of a nut unless it’s broken.” from chinua achebe: “a man who lives on the banks of the niger does not wash his hands with spittle.” “anger against a brother is felt in the flesh, not in the bone.” and from mongo beti of the cameroon: “what is woman? a stately palm tree. and anyone can climb it who has a belt.” these proverbs are realistic, often a bit cynical, sometimes poetic, and always impregnated with good, hard common sense. a second source of african wisdom in these novels is found in the black man’s ability to adjust to the difficult conditions under which he lives. his very survival is evidence of this ability. we believe with rene maran that the first law of wisdom is to stay alive. the man  or animal who cannot adapt is destined to disappear. but the african is destined to live. wisdom also requires man not only to adapt to life, but also to try to improve that life for himself, or for his children, or for his children’s children. to make an adjustment to life, one tactic used by the africans is their humor, irony. it’s healthy to be able to laugh occasionally, to laugh at oneself. there are countless examples in the novels of seeing the comic side of an unfunny situation. bernard dadie’s negre a paris visits a church in the french capital. he sees statues of saints along the wall and not one black one among them. “i repeat,” he says, “we have no right to paradise. apparently we must frighten st. peter an awful lot. and i guess he sends us down in the other direction because of the color of our skin.” a discussion of the europeans’ shortcomings ends when batouala’s father recommends a rabelaisian solution. he says, “we will do better to grumble less about the whites and to drink more. you know just as well as i do that except for the bed, pernod is the only important invention by the europeans.” the hero of oyono’s chemin d’europe (the road to europe) sets himself up in business as a guide to tourists and stages all kinds of fantastic shows for travellers who come to africa looking for exoticism. he sees to it that they photograph the pigmy, the monkey who is balancing on a branch, the boa constrictor puffed up after eating, and the hippopotamus scampering along the edge of the river —all of the so-called formidable, extraordinary, sensational scenes. and he says, “my compatriots and i improvised a little rite that delighted our explorers to such an extent that we could see them showing their film at the next cinematographic festival and being crowned africanists.” the same irony enables chinua achebe to end things fall apart with the district commissioner who stirred up all kinds of trouble musing over the book that he plans to write, said title to be “the pacification of the primitive tribes of the lower niger.” perhaps the crowning expression of african irony is camara laye’s le regard du roi (the radiance of the king) in which european and african values are portrayed in an entirely new light. clarence, the european exiled in black africa, must divest himself of his preconceived ideas of morality and justice and stand naked as a child before being received in the radiance of the king. the important and varied role played by laughter in african life is recognized by most of the novelists. several writers—maran, conton, dadie—describe it. (incidentally, you’ll find in richard wright’s black_power a very interesting passage on the laughter of kwame nkrumah.) ake loba analyzes the african laugh as follows: “the african laughs when he’s melancholy just as he dances when he’s sad. laughter also serves him as a response to the stranger who is curious to find out about his customs. he laughs to delude his interlocutor or to be evasive. in a word, he laughs when he’s happy, or when he’s angry or when he’s unlucky. “but all these laughters don’t have the same meaning, since laughter is a very eloquent vocabulary. generally the african laughs to mislead the person to whom he is speaking. he laughs to make the other man believe he’s not very observant and, meanwhile, the african is looking over very carefully, studying very carefully, the person who is trying to interrogate him. he dissects the hearts, he turns them over and over and then he becomes shut up in his own silence just as if he were ignorant of everything.” african laughter, seen in this light, is, therefore, a manifestation of african wisdom, a means of keeping one’s equilibrium, come what may. but there’s yet another indication of african wisdom in these novels: the determination to improve one’s existence. the most obvious evidence of this is the zeal for education, an area in which the african is less reluctant to accept european values, although not without modification. the struggle for an education fills many pages of these novels. the dark child, climbie, kocoumbo, uaventure ambigue, the african. in the african william conton summarizes a letter with which his father starts him out on his career as a student: “then my father went on to remind me that i had now started to climb a palm tree which was high and difficult to climb, that many were watching my progress, and much ripe fruit was awaiting me on the successful completion of my climb. he ended with a warning that if i failed to reach the top those watching me, both living and dead, would curse me for failing them. on the other hand, if i reached the top, in order simply to gorge myself with fruit, i would surely become sick and fall to the ground and die. but if i returned to my people to share with them the fruit of my labors, then all would sing my praise and thank me and honor those who had brought me to life.” the new schooling almost always contained painful separation as the youngsters left home for dakar, conakry, ougadougou, paris or london. it also meant creaking with the old traditions. nowhere in the novels is this more poignantly expressed than in l’aventure ambigu'e. la grand royale detests the foreign school, but nonetheless, she insists that her nephew and other africans enroll there. she explains: “we’ve got to go to the europeans and learn from them how to conquer without being right. moreover, the battle isn’t over yet. the new school is the new form of war fare that is being waged against us. the school in which i would place our children will kill in them what today we love and rightly conserve with care. perhaps the very memory of us will die in them. when they return from the school there may be those who will not recognize us.” “what i am proposing,” says this princess, “is that we should agree to die in our children’s heart and that the foreigners who have defeated us should fill the place which we shall have left free.” in explaining this, she uses the analogy of the fields: what do we do just before the rainy season—we love our fields, but still we plow them up, we set fire to them. if our children are going to get along in life, we’ve got to be willing to lose them for a while, at least until they learn the ways of the european and are able to make the necessary adjustment. likewise, boubou hama, in his autobiography, stresses the ordeal of separation. today, thanks to the education which led him to the ecole william ponty in senegal and to a distinguished career, he’s president of niger’s national assembly. in addition, as an untiring student of african culture, he has merged the best of two worlds into an admirable synthesis. occasionally, a novelist questions the applicability of the curriculum or the competence of certain teachers or the low level of certain education in institutions. it’s fantastic how illusory what we study in college is,” says mongo beti. on transferring from his school in ivory coast to france, ake loba’s hero, kocoumbo, finds himself terribly handicapped and ill-prepared to keep pace with his european classmates who are years younger than he. on the other hand, there’s a considerable amount of healthy self-criticism in the novels. ake loba chides those who are more diligent in frequenting cafes than in attending their classes. camara laye’s uncle complains about all the students who look down on technical school: “they’ve always thought about a career of paper scratching. is that the kind of career that you want? a career where you will forever be thirteen to the dozen.” and ousmane soce diop, who’s now senegal’s ambassador to this country, makes a similar observation: “we, the senegalese, the urban senegalese, we have a prejudice against manual trades. there is some progress, and some people nowadays are willing to become bricklayers or carpenters. and yet this prejudice still exists and some young men would rather live as parasites than to have to work with their hands.” and he adds: “a country which does not want to work and which is satisfied with luxury and pleasure is headed for failure in the great struggle for life.” the hero of bernard dadie’s climbie is even more explicit. he spends a summer vacation on his uncle’s farm and learns these facts of african life: “at the very beginning we started out wrong. but was it really our fault? with the european presence the jobs as clerks began, more deserving in the eyes of the people who didn’t understand that you could leave school without being a clerk either in the administration or in business or, in any case, always by the side of the european. and we all thought that way. the european was the master. everything depended on him—taxis, rain, and good weather as well.” and then the uncle goes on to relate the difficulties he had in making the plantation produce, and adds finally: “work, and after work, independence, my child. self-reliance should be the motto of your generation. and you should also run away from the man who doesn’t like to work.” thus, our authors stress the importance of developing technical and commercial skills if africa is to attain some degree of economic independence. the ill-fated hero of sembene ousmane’s o, pays, mon beau peuple attempts a farmers’ cooperative. to start his country on the way to industrialization udomo signs an agreement with the apostles of apartheid, even when this means sacrificing the life of his fellow revolutionary and long-time friend. corruption and conspicuous consumption on the part of public officials are decried by the nigerian achebe, while the senegalese abdoulaye sadji, now dead, criticizes the women of his country for their excessive expenditures on trinkets. now that political independence has been achieved by most of these countries the need for a viable economy becomes the no.  problem, and we may well expect to see it figure even more prominently in future novels by africans. as their novelists catch up with their economists, they will appreciate the urgency of intra- and inter-continental cooperation. in a remarkable passage udomo reduces his fundamental problems to three: “listen, selina,” he says to the market woman who helped him to become the father of his country. “i’ll tell you what i’m after. our country has three enemies, or rather, had three enemies. i’ve turned one of them into an ally now. but let’s say there are three. i know you can guess one, but can you guess the other two. no, don’t bother. the first is the white man. then there is poverty. and then there is the past. these are the three enemies.” this triple challenge will continue to confront the african novelist tomorrow. for the alleviation of poverty, much depends on the sincerity and perspicacity of the europeans’ cooperation. but the  decision as to what should be retained and what should be rejected from the past now rests squarely on african shoulders. in all likelihood a determined attempt will be made to eradicate tribal divisions and other obstacles to the realization of african unity, which is probably the basic tenet of contemporary african ideology. judging from recent examples in african fiction, neither christianity nor communism seems likely to become a predominant force. by and large, our novelists, viewing the european representative of christianity as an ally of colonialism, have tended to treat it with hostility or indifference. african wisdom will no doubt perceive the less debatable ties between communism and a more brutal, a more tenacious colonialism. at the moment there have been few manifestations of that phenomenon in african life. to keep his job in a paris factory and to please his european girlfriend, kocoumbo joins the party, but he never warms up to its doctrine, and he leaves the party after his girlfriend dies. summing up, we may say that our novelists, though relatively few in number and hampered by all kinds of obstacles, have attempted to interpret varied aspects of an extremely complex reality. with little encouragement—a goncourt prize in  and several minor awards down through the years— they have persevered in a vital but thankless task: that of portraying the african’s problems, aspirations and humanity to the world. some of their works have been mediocre; others would reflect credit on any literature. until recently few of their volumes had been translated; even today almost none of these writers can depend on the income from his novels for a livelihood. ousmane soce diop, birago diop, oyono and camara laye are in the diplomatic service; malonga, achebe and ekwensi have been working for the radio; quenum of dahomey, mongo beti and conton are school teachers; dadie is directeur des beaux arts; cheikh hamidou kane is with unicef. peter abrahams, living and writing in exile in the west indies, is the outstanding exception. the danger is that the more remunerative positions now available in the emergent african states may prevent them from continuing their literary careers, and this paradoxically, at a time when there is a ready market for their manuscripts. moreover, the new africa will need them to describe its new reality. collectively—despite a fumbling effort here and there—they have the experience, the talent, the imagination, and the objectivity. the material for a masterpiece is at their fingertips: a continent in transition, with a new prestige and new responsibilities; a world increasingly conscious of its interdependence; human relations between african and african, between european and african; the inevitable struggle against poverty, illiteracy and disease; the equally inevitable struggle for human rights in south africa and other multiracial areas; the quest for african unity. the promise of a rich harvest in african life and african letters may or may not be fulfilled, for much work remains to be done. but, on the whole, these forerunners have cleared the land, they have planted wisely and well, they have left their younger brothers grounds for optimism, a place in the sun, a heritage of hope. 
